[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
What is the secret to accessing
our quantum potential?
Is this even possible?
Let's enter the quantum
gap and discover
the infinite potential contained
within the zero-point field.
What does quantum really mean?
What is the key to all this?
It has to do with the
gap or the space between.
We are told that quantum
fields are everywhere.
What does that mean?
Everything that we can observe,
like particles and waves
of energy, are excitations
on a background field.
But just like the vibrations
on a guitar string,
there are only certain
allowed intervals
for how many wavelengths
it can fit on that string.
This is what is
called quantized.
When something is quantized,
its events and properties
are discrete rather
than continuous.
There are allowed states
and disallowed states.
A basic binary is the
simplest expression of this,
like a light switch--
on, off, one, zero.
Instead of thinking of
a line as continuous,
we can imagine it as a
discrete set of points
spaced really close together
with tiny gaps in between.
For example, in an atom when the
electrons leap between orbits,
it passes through
the quantum gap.
It's in one state, then it
seems to disappear and then
reappear in another orbit.
Where does it go in between?
There are only certain
allowed states or orbitals
where the electron
can be found, much
like the number of allowed
vibrations on the guitar
string.
The space between those
is called forbidden,
but it is in that forbidden
zone that all possibilities
are held.
The space between where
the gap is the key,
shifting into quantum
awareness becomes possible
when we focus on the gap.
The quantum gap is more
fundamental than the particles
or events, or the many
manifold expressions.
The gap is like the blank
canvas or empty space
upon which all objects
are painted or observed.
This is similar to the shift Neo
made in "The Matrix" movie when
he starts being able
to see everything
as a string of binary code of
ones in green light and zeros
in black, instead
of seeing people,
buildings, et cetera, as
solid, real things that
impose limitations.
Let's go back to the
quantum leap of an electron
for further insight.
When an electron jumps to
a higher orbital state,
a certain amount of energy
is needed to excite it.
For example, perhaps a
photon of ultraviolet light
strikes an electron and causes
it to leap to a higher energy
state.
In that higher energy state,
it has more potential energy,
and it's further away
from the nucleus.
We could say that
the atom expanded.
It now has more
empty space inside.
This empty space is very
important, even more so
than the particles.
If we were to take away the
empty space in our atoms,
then our entire body would
fit on the tip of a needle.
Yet, this empty space
is not empty at all.
It's teeming with
huge potential energy.
It holds the quantum sea
of infinite possibilities.
Most of us by now have heard
of the zero-point field
or the quantum vacuum.
But what really is it?
If we take a small volume of
empty space, remove all matter,
and even bring it to
absolute zero temperature,
classical physics would say
it should have zero energy.
But quantum physics gives us an
entirely different situation.
It tells us that the
vacuum would still
be filled with quantum fields
in their lowest energy or ground
state.
And due to the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle,
there must be fluctuations
in these fields giving
a non-zero energy.
The result is that
so-called empty space
is a dynamic, boiling
sea of virtual particles
and immense energy.
One easy way to
visualize this is
to imagine an atomic pendulum.
If the pendulum is resting and
at its lowest point of zero
height, classical
physics would say
it has zero kinetic and
zero potential energy.
Quantum physics, however, says
there must be a slight wobble
due to the uncertainty principle
because we cannot know both
the exact position and
momentum at the same time.
This is called
zero-point motion.
And this supports the ancient
hermetic principle of vibration
that says nothing rests.
Everything moves.
Everything vibrates.
As a result of this motion,
there is a non-zero ground
state energy.
Physicist David
Bohm once calculated
the potential zero-point
energy of the vacuum.
To do so, he assumed that
the smallest wavelength
a field excitation
could have is what's
called the Planck length,
which is just extremely tiny.
And the largest could be the
size of the cosmos itself.
Bohm calculated that
in one cubic centimeter
of empty space, the
amount of energy
would be far beyond the total
energy of all the matter
in the known universe.
Of course, the amount of
visible matter in the universe
only amounts to about
5% of its composition,
while 27% is composed
of dark matter, which
is some unknown kinds of
particles yet to be discovered.
And the remaining
68% is mysteriously
called dark energy,
which is actually
most likely due to the intrinsic
energy of the vacuum itself.
There is much debate as to
whether this zero-point energy
could ever be harnessed
for technological purposes,
but we do know that it is
a physically real energy.
Many engineers and
scientists are actively
investigating
whether this energy
can be tapped for
new energy technology
and rapid spaceflight.
But the modern day
concept of the vacuum
is no longer one of
emptiness, but a fullness.
It's a plenum.
It is a seething ocean of
dynamic quantum field activity.
Science has come
full circle back
to the ancient concept of
the ether or quintessence
of the alchemists.
They're even using these terms
again, which is fascinating.
It's currently
proposed to be a scalar
field with an overall negative
pressure or anti-gravity force.
What does that mean?
Simply that this
energy of the vacuum
is what causes the
universe to expand.
Some physicists are
now calling this
the fifth fundamental
force in the universe.
In metaphysics, we
would more likely
call this the first
force, the prima,
which is what initiated the
Big Bang in the first place.
How can we understand
this zero-point field,
this quintessence, which is so
far beyond our ordinary ability
to perceive?
To get a feel for
it, let's return
to the metaphor of the ocean.
To begin with, imagine the ocean
is quiet and completely still.
Its surface is as
smooth as glass.
This is the ground state.
Then from the depths,
something bubbles up
and breaks through
to the surface,
creating a disturbance.
The water will oscillate,
sending ripples or waves.
This is what is called
a quantum excitation
or fluctuation of the field.
Such an excitation
corresponds to a particle wave
of matter or force.
Philosopher of
science Ervin Laszlo
gave a great analogy that
serves very well here.
Imagine that each
type of particle
is like a different
kind of boat.
Some are big and slow
like cruise ships.
Others are fast and
powerful like speed boats.
And so others are lightweight
and have minimal trace.
Each different type of boat
creates a different type
of wake as it travels
through the water.
The waves that spread
out from the wake
carry certain information about
the size, speed, and location
of the boat.
And as these waves
spread out, they
influence all other
boats traveling nearby.
The busier the
ocean, the more waves
that combine and interfere,
the more the water
becomes modulated by
these wave patterns.
And thus, it carries more
information or memory
of all its activities.
Not only that, but the
waves also influence what
is swimming beneath the surface.
These waves inform others of
the presence of that boat,
as well as influence
their motion.
Even when the boat is
long gone, the waves
can still be seen and felt
like a memory of the boat that
passed through.
Now, imagine that this
wave memory lasts forever
in the infinite quantum sea
of the zero-point field.
We're going to add one slight
modification to this picture.
Quantum particles not
only move through space,
they also have a property
called spin that interacts
with the vacuum.
So beyond the typical wave field
that they leave in their wake,
they also create vortices
or rotating wave packets.
These were named torsion
fields by Russian physicists.
As the various wave and
torsion fields intersect,
they form the
interference patterns
that are needed to encode
the hologram introduced
in another episode.
This holographic information
is encoded on the surface
of the quantum sea.
And as with all holograms,
the information is non-local.
It is distributed
throughout the whole.
In the quantum vacuum, waves
propagate quasi-instantly,
linking, informing, and
connecting all things.
This is the most plausible
reason for entanglement
and the coherence found at so
many levels of our universe.
It is in this way that
the quantum vacuum carries
and stores information about
all things and activities,
from the tiniest of subatomic
particles to the cells
of our body, to entire organisms
and even the cosmos itself.
There is no limit to
the information that can
be conserved within this field.
As Laszlo puts it,
"Thanks to information
conserved and conveyed
by this field,
the universe is of
mind-boggling coherence.
All things are connected."
Let's pause here for a moment.
How can we relate
this to our lives?
What does all of
this mean for us?
First of all, can you access
your ground state or zero point
where everything is
quiet, for example,
by finding peace and
stillness through a practice
of meditation?
Or are you in constant activity?
Finding our zero
point is essential
if we want to have a meaningful
influence on the quantum realm.
Otherwise, much
of what we do just
creates more noise, which
results in more randomness.
Secondly, what excites you?
What disturbs you?
Are the stimuli that you
expose your quantum field
to elevating you in a
good way, or are they
bringing in chaotic vibrations
that simply disturb the peace?
Third, is your influence
on the quantum sea stormy,
or is it well modulated?
How conscious and
intentional are you
of this process in your life?
Not only that, but remember,
the field is connected.
So when we disturb or
excite the quantum sea,
what ripples are we
sending out to the rest
of the connected universe?
Remember also that the
quantum realm is not
only influenced by our actions,
but by our consciousness
as well.
And perhaps the biggest
question is, how might you
live your life
differently if you
knew that every thought,
word, and action was
being recorded and
sending ripples
throughout the universe?
These are all important
things to consider
if we want to harness
our quantum potential.
In today's standard
model of physics,
they talk about fermions,
which are particles of matter,
and bosons, which are
force carriers that
emerge from the quantum vacuum.
Now while the
terminologies vary,
the core concepts are
all the same, the only
difference being that in the
ancient wisdom teachings,
this field is not only the
source of all physical forms
and forces, but also all
mind or consciousness, which
is eternal.
This universal consciousness
holds all memory
and directs the creative forces.
In the early 1900s, Nikola
Tesla wrote an editorial article
called "Man's
Greatest Achievement."
In it, he mentions this
field with its prana
or creative force acting
upon akasha or ether,
and setting it into
tiny, spinning vortices
to become matter.
Then as the forces
subside, matter
disappears back into the field.
Tesla, always the
visionary, asks,
"Can man control this
greatest, most awe-inspiring
of all processes in nature?
If he could do this, he
would have powers almost
unlimited and supernatural.
He could express all the
creations of his mind
on any scale, in forms
concrete and imperishable."
Can we harness
this quantum field?
Most traditional
scientists would tell you
there is no way to tap into the
energy of the quantum vacuum
or zero-point field, but
that is because they are only
considering things from the
materialistic perspective.
They calculate that we need
to put an incredible amount
of physical energy in to get the
same amount of energy back out.
So to them, it's a zero-sum
effort not worth the expense.
This argument, though,
is based on treating
the universe as a
closed system, and it
ignores the energy that can
be generated and directed
by consciousness.
In metaphysics, we say
consciousness or awareness
is primary.
That first hermetic principle
says the all is mind.
The universe is mental.
But here, mind means
universal consciousness
or unity consciousness.
If we can train
our mind to achieve
a coherent state of
unity consciousness,
then we can tap
the quantum field.
At a practical level,
how do we do this?
Getting into the
quantum space is an art.
It is the art of becoming
quantum conscious.
It takes repetition and
training ourselves to access it.
But once we do and we
anchor the feeling of it,
then it gets easier
and easier to access.
Now, short of being a yogi
who meditates in a cave 12
hours a day for 20
plus years, what can
we do to harness this art
and reprogram ourselves?
Fortunately, there
are some keys that
can help us transform faster.
These are keys that
can be integrated
into daily life in the moments
between our activities.
First, we must find our zero
point, a state of emptiness.
Only then will we
be able to access
the fullness or the infinite
potential of the quantum field.
This zero point or ground
state is one of coherence.
There are three keys
taught by mystery schools
for achieving such a state.
The first key is to realize
that there is only now.
The second key is
through stillness.
Relax the body and
quiet the mind.
Bring our entire being to
become like a quiet pond,
where the waters are
so still they perfectly
reflect light like a mirror.
Use your will to bring
the waters to stillness.
The third key is focus.
What you focus on expands.
So focus on the gap,
and the gap will expand.
Remember, the gap is the
space between quantum states.
Focus on that space between.
Visually look at the
space between objects
or the space between
you and I. Listen
to the pause or
silence between sounds.
Tune in to the silence.
Kinesthetically feel
and expand the space
in between breaths in,
out, fullness, emptiness.
This is the creative
breath of source.
In that space between
is infinite possibility.
What do you desire to experience
or manifest out of that space?
Once we tap into the gap, how
do we then access its potential
and intentionally direct
what manifests out?
Is there a way to master
the quantum observer effect
and truly direct the
course of reality?
It is well established
by now that observation
plays an integral
role in physics,
one that triggers something
to manifest out of the plenum.
Better known as the
observer effect in physics,
they call it the
measurement problem.
And it's a problem to
traditional scientists
because it says that our
universe is participatory.
What we observe is
determined by how
we set up the experiment or
the way we choose to observe.
What does that mean?
It means that consciousness
influences what information
emerges from the quantum sea.
Our method of
observation preselects
or predetermines what options
become available to us.
It's a lot like
saying our perspective
creates a bias, which then
determines our reality.
It also means that consciousness
is an essential ingredient
of our universe.
Nothing comes into being
without our involvement.
Now materialists still
argue this point.
They claim that a machine can
make an observation independent
of human consciousness.
But as we'll see shortly,
this argument doesn't hold up.
At some point, a
conscious observer
must become aware
of that information.
How is this observer
effect discovered?
Well, it relates to
wave particle duality.
Scientists have long
sought to understand
the nature of light and matter.
Are they waves or particles?
By the 1800s, light was known
to be waves, while matter
was thought of as particles.
But various
experimental evidence
started mounting up in
the early 1900s that
suggested light might also act
as particles called photons
and that matter might
also act as waves.
Science became confronted
with a mystery or paradox.
How can they be both
wave and particle?
The paradigm at the time
said it must be either
or, not both and.
To solve this
mystery, scientists
perform the famous
double-slit experiments.
Briefly, a beam
of light or matter
shines through a plate
with two small slits in it.
Whatever passes through the
two slits then continues
on to a screen behind
it for observation.
In typical wave-like
behavior, the wave
passes through both
slits and then forms
two waves on the other side.
And these two waves
intersect each other,
combining constructively
and destructively.
When they hit the
screen, it then
reveals what's called
an interference pattern
with several bright
and dark bands.
But in typical
particle behavior,
the particles pass through
one slit or the other.
What perplexed scientists
was that if they set up
the experiment to see if either
light or matter is a wave,
then indeed they get
wave-like behavior.
But if they place
detectors on the two slits
to try to observe which slit
the electrons or photons are
going through, then the results
change to particle behavior.
How can it be both?
What does this all mean?
These experiments confirm that
both light and matter are forms
of energy, and that energy can
behave as waves or particles
depending on the
conditions we give it.
It's all about how we choose
to set up our observations
or measurements.
The very act of observing
has a dramatic effect
on the behavior.
It's as if the quanta are aware
that they are being observed.
Or we might say that our
choice informs the quantum
vacuum, which then responds
intelligently and gives us
what we asked for.
This relates to the
spiritual teaching of ask
and you shall receive.
In the Kabbalistic tradition,
the word "Kabbalah"
means to receive.
The practice involves
asking questions
and receiving answers.
Depending on the question
and how it's phrased,
it shapes a kind of
vessel or container.
So long as that question
remains unanswered,
the vessel is empty.
And like the quantum
gap, the empty vessel
holds infinite possibilities.
As we continue to hold
our focus on the question,
it's like conducting
an experiment
and observing what comes.
Eventually, source
energy flows in
to fill the vessel,
revealing an answer.
Many questions have
more than one answer,
depending on perspective.
Different questions set
up different containers
or experiments, thus revealing
different types of answers.
For example, we could
ask, where am I?
Or we could ask,
where am I going?
One question is about right now.
The other is about the future.
They can reveal
different answers just
by a slight alteration
of the question.
Part of being a good Kabbalist,
as well as a scientist,
is about learning to
ask the right questions.
The crux of the
observer effect is
that the observer sets
the context and conditions
for how energy will behave.
As observers, we give
context or meaning
to situations based on our
assumptions, expectations,
and perspectives.
Believing is seeing, not
the other way around.
Through our participation and
belief in what is possible,
we establish what
options can emerge.
Does this mean that what we
call physical reality is created
by observation, or is our world
physically real independent
of us?
If it is created by
observation, does it
need to be conscious observation
or can it be any observation
regardless of awareness,
such as by a machine?
A physicist and mathematician,
John Von Neumann,
deeply addressed this
measurement problem
in his 1932 book on
quantum mechanics.
He showed that any part
of a physical system
could be treated as a
chain of quantum objects
that become entangled together.
This includes all measuring
devices or machines, even up
to the whole physical universe.
And this entire chain
of physical objects
would join a quantum
system of super positions,
becoming a part of a
universal wave function.
The whole system would remain
in that quantum superposition
until it is observed.
Only something outside
of the calculation
can collapse the wave function.
So Von Neumann concluded
that this something
must be consciousness because
it goes beyond the physical.
So what does this tell us?
It tells us that a
well-trained mind
is able to directly
observe the quantum field
and to get it to
materialize something out.
If consciousness is so
central to causing things
to manifest out of
the quantum vacuum,
then how might it have been
involved in the beginning
of our universe?
The universe is more
than just participatory.
It relies on conscious observers
to manifest physicality.
That's a pretty
loaded statement,
and it will take
some time for science
to catch up on this wisdom.
First, scientists need to
accept the fundamental existence
of consciousness.
Consciousness is at the
foundation of the universe.
Then matter is a result
of mind or spirit.
How do we accomplish
this mastery of mind?
How do we harness
our consciousness
in order to have greater
influence on the quantum field?
This is where some kind
of self-mastery practice
and training comes in.
Both ancient traditions and
modern parapsychology studies
agree on some basic steps.
First, we must relax the body.
This usually involves
slowing down brainwaves,
using some combination
of visualization, focused
breathing, or other
meditation techniques.
Second is to quiet the mind.
We talked about
getting into our ground
state, that key of stillness,
especially inner stillness,
helping us access that
quantum gap for what
we may call the void.
This stillness is the
background for all movement.
Tune into the stillness
of the quantum gap.
Become like a quiet pond.
Remember also that this is
the ether or quintessence
of the alchemists.
The third step is focus.
We must be of clear
intent, and we
have to be able to harness
and direct our will.
Alchemists of
different traditions
have created many methods for
how to harness will or life
force essence.
And common to them all
is developing a practice
that strengthens the qualities
of discipline, patience,
concentration, and holding
focus for long durations.
The fourth step
involves a combination
of belief and desire.
One set of guidelines on
how to work real magic
says we must bring about
a successful combination
of intense desire
and concentration
with an appropriate object.
This intense desire
can also be considered
as a resonant or coherent state.
This step is a
process of waiting
with excitement, belief, and
openness to the possibilities.
When it comes to
the quantum realm,
we must learn to
hold an awareness
of many simultaneous
possibilities.
Before we go into
the final step,
let's go a bit deeper into how
we hold this quantum awareness.
As a simple example, take
the old optical illusion.
Is it a chalice or two faces?
It's both, depending on how
we choose to look at it.
Now, which is the particle view,
and which is the wave view?
That's kind of a trick question
because both views are particle
or object-oriented views.
Both have definite forms.
The wave or field view
would be more gestalt.
If we look beyond
the box and take
in the whole image at once,
we can get a feel for this.
Another thing we
must realize when
it comes to the observer effect
is that it involves sacrifice.
Recall the quantum
principles of complementarity
and uncertainty.
The more precisely we identify
some observable state, the more
we lock in that state
and therefore eliminate
the other observables
or possibilities that
could have been, this
is what physicists call
collapsing the wave function.
One way to imagine this is
to think of a house of cards.
We see there are many
possibilities in there.
We may or may not know
what they all are.
When we make a measurement,
it's like pulling a card out.
This disrupts the field
and leads to a collapse
of the whole house of cards.
We get something out,
but at the expense
of sending all those
other possibilities away.
Given that, the
question arises, can we
select which
possibility comes out?
Can we control this?
Can we choose the specific
card of our desire?
Or will it be random, subject
only to quantum uncertainty
and nature's selection?
Traditional science would
say that it's random.
Due to the
uncertainty principle,
we can't control
what state comes out.
But ancient
initiatory traditions
say there is a way
to direct this.
It requires training
and mastery of the mind.
It might not be easy,
but it is possible.
And it's worth the effort
to gain this skill.
Because when we do,
the possibilities
for what we can
accomplish are limitless.
There is also research
that supports this claim.
Consciousness has been
shown capable of shifting
random physical systems
away from randomness.
Random number generators or
RNGs are electronic devices
that use quantum
phenomenon such as electron
tunneling as a means of
generating randomness.
Studies with these
devices have consistently
shown that when a
state of resonance
occurs within the field,
whether by an individual
or a collective, it causes
the random number generator
to shift away from randomness.
What's meant by resonance here?
Well, it's a feeling of at
oneness, total absorption
into unity consciousness.
When we can bring ourselves to
that state of consciousness,
transcending the
illusion of separation,
that is when our ability
to manifest our desires
improves significantly.
If we can truly
direct the outcome,
then the next
question is, how do we
know what the best option is?
How do we really master
this observer effect
to get what we desire?
This final step has
to do with intuition.
Only our intuition, ESP
or spiritual senses,
can peer beyond the
hologram into true reality.
Fortunately, this is
something we can all
develop through practice.
When our intuition is
strong and we trust it,
that is when we become
good at selecting the best
possibilities.
Thus far, we've spent a lot of
time talking about the mind,
but this final step is one that
must be felt from the heart.
It involves setting ego and
attachments aside, surrendering
to higher wisdom and waiting
for that heart-centered feelings
of conviction, knowingness,
joy, and certainty to guide us.
Once that knowingness
comes in with clarity,
see it manifesting as
if it's already done.
And so it is.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]